Living Improv
That feeling, of ambiguity, uncertainty, as any curtain rises. Improv, it seems to me, is stretching that feeling out for the whole show. Learning to inhabit it.
Improvisation as a life technique has positive and negative aspects. On the one hand, lack of forethought or direction, can lead to a meandering plot. On the other, there is something to be said for always being open to little buddhist surprises, momentary awarenessess, lightenings of moods.
Improvisation is difficult to define, although  perhaps not so much as "living." Not that I would to go through such a tedious introductory exercise as definnig terms, merely to point out that by the end of the book I would like to have shown how life and improv imply one another: if something is improvising, it is alive, and if something is alive, it is improvising.

EMAIL TO BRANDON

This and yesterday morning I was thinking of what I most wanted to do on my days off, and since playing an RPG with you like we did in Chicago, I thought I would sit, and write to you about the campaign I'm in here.

Like most of my social interactions here, the DnD game is connected with being stoned--it is held every Friday at a Cannibis cafe, which is just a house/air-BnB run by this New Yorker with really long hair, in a neighborhood called "The Collective" near Portland State University. The first time I went there for a game I didn't go in, because it just looked like someone's house, and I was afraid I would just be smoking with a bunch of college kids. Then, later, I saw another meetup at the same place for a yoga class, and since then I've been going at least once a week.

I've been using meetup a lot to find things to do. Last night there was a jam session in Northeast Portland, at a place I'd been to before. After coming back from the cafe I'm at now, with some groceries in my hiking pack so I could carry them on my bike, I felt like I needed to leave the house (Leah was there with her boyfriend), so I biked to Forest park with a notebook and mandolin, waited around there, ate some Thai food, and then biked the rest of the 11 or so miles to the music studio.

COMING BACK
