

 STRANGE COMMITS

 The wreckage of the starship, the shrine, rested where it had smashed against the mountain. It's shell corroded so far and no more, as if opening up its heart. So, too, seemed to be the message of the star-folk, that their knowledge should take them so far, but no farther--certain steps, to be sure, should be taken on their own.

 Here, the ancients said, is what we would have done, had we survived. These are the images of your planet taken from space. Note the mineral deposits. There would be a nice source of geo-thermal, according to our preliminary scans as we were hurtling towards our death, nearby your location, away from the smell of ocean and towards the rising sun.

 There are neighbors in this galactic sector that you should meet, once you get radio technology. No rush, but your planet is going to experience some fairly intense warming within the next ten thousand years or so, and it is always good to have friends in any case, should there be a random meteor or alien invasion or some other misfortune.

BALANCE

 Say the present moment is a plank, 
 a scale, 
 a stage, 
 and on one side is the happiness known in the past, 
 and on the other side is the happiness expected of the future. 
 Which direction does it tilt? 
 Can you shift your weight a bit,
  so we slope into journeys?

MNEMOMANCER

I wrote "Good" on one side of the bit of envelope I had saved from the fire. We were on the rock on the hill, the upper path, my hammock strung nearby. The lettering was what my friend B from high school had posted, drawings he had made in bars. Mine was a poor imitation. On the other side I wrote "memory." Then I put it in the fire.

There were some green branches, coals from the night before. It didn't catch flame, just slowly smoldered, in from the edges.

The ambassadors went out into the levels of collapsing gamespace, the shelves collapsing at breakpoints according to protocols established early in the universe's archtecture. Occasionally a memory droid would roll by, usually jammed or mal-fitted but occasionally able to give them a fairly good fix on the meta-map, and where to find a transport gate.

At this point maybe there is a cinematic splash screen, an evocative landscape, like the hudson school, but with an ecosystem of dissolved wish-fulfillment.

~

"No, Gragarth," the human said warmly. "You were, along with the planet suit, the start of my species-arc. It's been almost the amount of lifetimes as would have been alive at any given time, given a moderate population. Most of that was spent not knowing if the spores of the later sentient swarms made it though the vents to End. Now, you have told me, and I understand why those plays were so remarkable to me. Not because of the subject--humanity is unexceptional--but because of the time contraction."
