YES AND

OUTLINE

I. Gratitude, Intersection
Ia. Opposition/Rebellion/Debate
Ib. Memetics
Ic. Chicago
Id. Freeze and Justify: change the picture
II. Peru
III.
IV.
V.
VI.

I. GRATITUDE

I had this Russian literature professor (not Russian himself,) talking about structure in literature and music, how there were bridges, thematic call-backs or anticipations (prolepsis, in literary criticism), touching down at intervals in the text or score. The image of a bridge, the novel laid out like a reel from one of the old dot matrix printers, or an illuminated scroll from feudal japan like the one B showed me in the Chicago field-museum shelves. This book is going to end with acknowledgments, but the entire first chapter can be seen as setting the stage for the sincere thanks that will come at the end.

We are, especially someone like me who has been involved in the educational system most of my life, what we have been taught. Humans are social animals, and most of our behavior is learned.

EVOLUTIONARY PSYCHOLOGY

There is, I'm willing to speculate, an evolutionary basis for why humans are drawn to improvisational theater.

There are three high schoolers in the car, going into the city to see an improv comedy show. The parent in the front seat is interchangeable, since we went several times with different chaperones. Parents were, of course, simply expected to take us everywhere. Driving North into the big city was exciting, smacking of field trips and special occasions, like seeing the lights in crown center for the holidays. In the back seat (was there more of us? Were we in the van?) we were playing 'change-the-picture', seeing how many times we could cause the drawing to drastically shift, kind of an art equivalent of freeze and justify. The idea was to use as few additional lines as possible to effect the largest change in what the picture was. A common and useful trick was rotating the paper 90 or 180 degrees. You had to be able to reduce the drawing to shapes, and then assemble it again into a representation that wasn't there before.

All these games, it seems to me, are variations on the theme of turn-based collaboration. The same utopian idea behind The Whole Family. The bridge I have been walking on all my life. The paper would eventually get too full to make sense of, the captions more and more of a stretch. The game would end, more often than not, with one of us scribbling all over the page, and declaring it to be a spilt bottle of ink, or a polar bear in a snowstorm.



FESTIVALS

In the year I spent in Ollantaytambo, I got to experience a full cycle of festivals and seasons. Two I remember especially: the solstice, and the festival for the patron saint of the town (Kilkiwhats-his-name).

An unmistakable feature of the village was the enormous, ancient "fortress". It had terraces and towers, with an imposing wall Bob, one of the volunteers, and I hiked up to the edge of, contemplating but never daring to perpetrate a clandestine night visit.

I'd gone on one of these with a group of elders from the camping hostel, having heard that they sometimes take tourists, on the full moon, to some of the normally closed-off ruins, under special, if not official, dispensation from the guards. We took medicine bowls, musical bowls, one of which had arabic script all over it, and walked through the old parts of town, with the huge blocks of stone, quarried from a distant mountain.

Through some midnight magic of backstreets and bridges, we did end up on the edge of the complex, where I bouldered around on some of the roped-off archaeology until the guides got nervous. We didn't want to be too visible, too obvious about being there. People played the musical bowls, and the leader of the group (he gave me his website, afterwards, he did some kind of mystic tour business out of cusco) chanted and talked a bit, but mostly everyone just sat and listened. I had my mandolin but didn't play.

WHY THIS BOOK

I feel like the most important things I've learned relate in one way or another to improv.

Writing about my experiences with improvisational theater will let me relive, like a pathetic wash-up, the glory days of a sheltered past.

~

Improv is a way of inhabiting moments more fully than might happen when players are following a script.

Unscripted or memorized performances were the rule for most of human history--writing is a latecomer to the stage, no matter how outsized a role literacy has come to play in some contemporary cultures.

Writing this, I imagine a performative context, slowed down maybe, to allow for the speed of typing, but nonetheless a linear path through time.

In my life, too, I'm trying to establish a thematic continuity, despite the scenes and scenery dramatically changing.


~
BEST WAY TO READ THIS BOOK

The best way to experience this book would be to browse the games or sections that interest you, forget that you read them, and then years later, when some other activity finishes early or whatever group you are with has the liberty to explore, you use one of these ideas, without remembering where it came from, and adapting it to whatever context or situation you are in.

 STRANGE COMMITS

 The wreckage of the starship, the shrine, rested where it had smashed against the mountain. It's shell corroded so far and no more, as if opening up its heart. So, too, seemed to be the message of the star-folk, that their knowledge should take them so far, but no farther--certain steps, to be sure, should be taken on their own.

 Here, the ancients said, is what we would have done, had we survived. These are the images of your planet taken from space. Note the mineral deposits. There would be a nice source of geo-thermal, according to our preliminary scans as we were hurtling towards our death, nearby your location, away from the smell of ocean and towards the rising sun.

 There are neighbors in this galactic sector that you should meet, once you get radio technology. No rush, but your planet is going to experience some fairly intense warming within the next ten thousand years or so, and it is always good to have friends in any case, should there be a random meteor or alien invasion or some other misfortune.

BALANCE

 Say the present moment is a plank, a scale, a stage, and on one side is the happiness known in the past, and on the other side is the happiness expected of the future. Which direction does it tilt? Can you put your weight a bit there, so we slope into journeys?

MNEMOMANCER

I wrote "Good" on one side of the bit of envelope I had saved from the fire. We were on the rock on the hill, the upper path, my hammock strung nearby. The lettering was what my friend B from high school had posted, drawings he had made in bars. Mine was a poor imitation. On the other side I wrote "memory." Then I put it in the fire.

There were some green branches, coals from the night before. It didn't catch flame, just slowly smoldered, in from the edges.

The ambassadors went out into the levels of collapsing gamespace, the shelves collapsing at breakpoints according to protocols established early in the universe's archtecture. Occasionally a memory droid would roll by, usually jammed or mal-fitted but occasionally able to give them a fairly good fix on the meta-map, and where to find a transport gate.

At this point maybe there is a cinematic splash screen, an evocative landscape, like the hudson school, but with an ecosystem of dissolved wish-fulfillment.

~

"No, Gragarth," the human said warmly. "You were, along with the planet suit, the start of my species-arc. It's been almost the amount of lifetimes as would have been alive at any given time, given a moderate population. Most of that was spent not knowing if the spores of the later sentient swarms made it though the vents to End. Now, you have told me, and I understand why those plays were so remarkable to me. Not because of the subject--humanity is unexceptional--but because of the time contraction."
